# How this startup is changing the personal finance playing field

---

## Overview & Origin

Chime Financial is a cloud-based personal finance *‘unicorn’* startup. 
Headquartered in San Francisco and founded by Chris Britt (CEO) and Ryan 
King (CTO) in 2012, Chime offers a fully digital, fee-free way for 
customers to access key financial services. While legally considered a 
financial technology company and not a bank, the founders created Chime 
with the strategic aim to serve as an alternative to traditional banking 
and to allow its customers to have a “financial peace of mind” where 
basic banking services are easy and free.

The fintech firm has soared in popularity since its incorporation due to 
its operating without the additional fees commonly associated with 
traditional banks, such as overdraft fees, service fees, monthly service 
fees, minimum balance requirements, and foreign transaction fees. Over 
the past ten years, it has paved the way for other “challenger banks” or 
“neo-banks” such as Varo Bank, Current, and Upgrade. Chime, maintaining 
its private company status following its postponement of its IPO due to 
fintech valuations dropping nearly 40% this year, is primarily funded by 
private equity investors in funding series rounds. According to 
Crunchbase, the company raised upwards of $750 million in its latest 
Series G fund primarily from Sequoia Capital Global Equities. Over its 
funding rounds, the firm has amassed $2.3 billion from Sequoia, DST, 
Coatue, and others such as Tiger Global Management and the SoftBank 
Vision Fund. It is presently valued at $25 billion, making it America’s 
most valuable digital banking service.

## Business Activities

As a neobank, or non-traditional financial service which partners with 
FDIC member banks to deliver customer account insurance, Chime aims to 
solve and directly challenge the financial hurdles, inefficiencies, and 
problems of accessibility commonly attributed to traditional banking 
firms. These issues have grown among younger and less-financially stable 
Americans, especially given the record high cost of living and inflation 
seen in today’s economic climate. The lack of additional fees such as 
service fees, overdraft fees, its competitive rate, and its 
implementations of products such as its no-minimum balance Chime Visa 
Debit Card, early paycheck access up to two days in advance through 
direct deposit, fee-free ATM use at 60,000+ ATMs, FDIC-insured deposit/
savings accounts provided by Bancorp or Stride Bank, NA remains 
increasingly attractive to a growing number of everyday Americans. Chime 
instead gains revenue from interchange revenue from transactions.

As intended, “Chime is designed for the millennial generation who expect 
services to be personalized and mobile-first. They want to manage all 
aspects of their lives through their phone, including how they manage 
their money,” said Ethan Erchinger, Chime Director of Operations (chime.
com). As of 2021, the firm has hosted over 8% of the American banking 
market who consider Chime their primary banking service, boasting 13.2 
million customer accounts on its platform. According to Forbes, digital 
banks hold a 14% market share among Americans with two bank accounts and 
a 17% market share with those with three—these numbers are only 
increasing. There is expected to be about 47.5 million digital bank-only 
account holders in America by 2024. Interest in the firm skyrocketed 
particularly during the onset of the COVID pandemic in 2020, which 
triggered economic crisis for many Americans, especially millennials,
following the shutdown of most in-person services. Chime stood above 
competing neobanks in particularly with their early-access wage feature, 
which caused their millions of customers to receive their 2020 COVID 
stimulus checks, processing more than $375 million to its members a week 
ahead of the federal distribution date.

In 2019, Chime released its robust overdraft fee-free service known as 
SpotMe, which allows active Chime debit card holders to make purchases 
that could overdraft their account up to $200. It is so robust that 
passing the -$200 mark would only elicit a transaction denial, rather 
the additional fees found in both traditional banks and its competitors, 
such as Varo Bank. On the contrary, Varo Bank does not allow overdrafts, 
instead declining any transaction outright that would result in a 
negative checking balance. Traditional overdraft protections cost 
Americans on average $250 annually from just a few purchases, earning 
these banks upwards of $34 billion in overdraft fee profit in 2017. 
Additionally, Chime offers free cash deposits with its partner, 
Walgreens, while Varo and other competitors could feature relatively 
pricey cash deposit fees of upwards of $4 regardless of location. With 
Chime’s mission to help its everyday customers and give them the 
financial breathing room that they need, it truly allows Chime to stand 
out from its competition.

Since its founding in 2012, Chime has evolved its use of technologies in 
order to adequately scale up with increasing customer demand and to 
reduce workloads and increase the productivity of its software 
engineers. Originally limited by its 5 TB digital warehouse database, 
Chime migrated to cloud-based Snowflake and Amazon services such as AWS 
Glue, Amazon EC2, Amazon Athena, and Amazon Aurora in 2020, according to 
stackshare.com. This change allowed the firm to infinitely scale the 
size of their now cloud-based database rather than continue to reach its 
original hosting service capacity, which had resulted in unwanted 
application downtime and caused unreliable experiences for some of its 
members. Snowflake’s built-in Looker Business Intelligence (BI) tool 
gave Chime the ability to query large quantities of consumer JSON data 
in real time. This greatly increased quantification capabilities of 
usage data to more effectively personalize member experience on its 
mobile application, such as its personalized fee-free ATM finder 
function, which compiles personal usage, geographical, and population 
density data to show customers the best ATMs for their needs. The firm 
has exhibited an exemplary use of artificial intelligence in its 
predictive personalization system for marketing purposes as well, 
tailoring the offered website experience to its customers and to drive 
attention to its best-performing products.

## Landscape

As aforementioned, Chime has greatly influenced the fintech personal 
finance market. Having predated much of its competition, it has received 
the most funding and accessed the newest innovations accordingly. Some 
of these innovations utilized by much of this domain include the switch 
to cloud-based services to account for big data, machine learning and 
artificial intelligence to supplement the manual labor of sorting 
consumer usage data like location, spending habits, income, and 
preferences.

Firms such as Ally, Upgrade, Varo Bank, and Current, have all enlisted 
big data cloud-based software like AWS and comparable services. 
Presently, the integration of cryptocurrency investing is beginning to 
trend in this fintech domain, with competitors like Ally being one of 
the few neobanks offering this option is conjunction with savings and 
checking accounts. As interest in mobile banking continues to
rise, especially among millennials and older Gen-Z, utilization on these 
features will only continue to become more of a necessity in the neobank 
market.

## Results

In the fintech personal finance sector, neobanks compete on metrics such 
as rates, featurization, and segmentation. With Chime boasting a 
combination of entirely fee-free services including free cash deposits, 
robust overdraft protections, and 2.00% APY on savings accounts, credit 
building services, and early access to wages, the firm has been 
outperforming competitor neobanks in saving their customers money and 
setting the bar for the adoption of technological innovations. As such, 
competitors such as Current, have entered the market emulating some of 
the same features Chime has become known for, like its SpotMe program 
for overdraft protections up to $200.

Chime also excels in segmentation, intentionally targeting and 
attracting low or middle-income millennial and Gen Z customers seeking 
greater control of their finances at a rate much higher than any 
competing challenger banks. With 13.2 million consumers, Chime leads its 
competitors Current (4.0 million), Aspiration (3.0 million), and Varo 
Bank (2.7 million) by an incredible margin, also giving it the highest 
valuation of any personal finance fintech startup at $25 billion.

## Recommendations

While Chime has an abundant list of pros, it also holds onto some cons 
and areas the firm could expand into or improve. Chime excels at 
personal finance management, yet also limits itself to such. As 
aforementioned, its competitor, Ally Bank, has incorporated 
commission-free and self-directed cryptocurrency investing through 
crypto-specific stocks and trusts into its available services, making it 
a rarity in the neobank market. 

With cryptocurrency steadily and inevitably becoming more accessible and 
mainstream, personal finance fintech firms will soon feel the pressure 
to adopt similar services as an increasing number of millennials and 
young adults begin to show greater interest in participating in 
investment markets, even if by partial shares like available on 
Robinhood. While it is unlikely that cryptocurrencies would be replacing 
fiat currency anytime soon, the conjunction of the two on one platform 
would only serve as an asset in the future for these firms. Given 
Chime’s exceptional valuation, revenue, and marketing capabilities, I 
would advise that it adopts these crypto investment programs into its 
systems through use of blockchain technology in order to facilitate such 
highly encrypted transactions.

## Sources 
* https://www.chime.com/ 
* https://www.forbes.com/advisor/banking/chime-review/ 
* https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/chime-2 
* https://aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/chime/ 
* https://www.snowflake.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Case-Study-Chime-0616.pdf 
* https://www.forbes.com/sites/isabelcontreras/2022/06/07/the-future-of-personal-finance-fintech-50-2022/?sh=3fea4f9f5235 
* https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/banking/varo-vs-chime-which-is-better-for-you 
* https://stackshare.io/chime/chime 
* https://relayfi.com/blog/best-neobanks#best-neobanks-for-personal-banking 
* https://www.forbes.com/sites/ronshevlin/2020/11/16/how-14-billion-chime-is-dominating-digital-banking-and-all-of-banking/?sh=6751c7ff2210 
* https://thefinancialbrand.com/news/data-analytics-banking/artificial-intelligence-banking/predictive-analytics-digital-banking-website-accounts-73355/ 
* https://www.nerdwallet.com/reviews/banking/current * https://www.nerdwallet.com/reviews/banking/chime-banking 
* https://www.insiderintelligence.com/insights/neobanks-explained-list/